README.md, before:

This ground truth repository is a work in process; it currently accounts for a part of our complete Caroline Minuscule training pool of around 70 manuscripts used for our OCRopus Caroline Minuscule model (see ocropus-models repository).


OCR Ground Truth Transcription Protocol

The ground truth published in this repository has been created according to a number of guidelines designed to find a compromise
between the quirks of medieval writing and the limitations of modern software (i.e. its incompatibility with certain medieval characters or the fact that some 
medieval characters are not represented in unicode).
With some respect, we simply made some executive decisions on the transcription guidelines where we felt this would best serve the overall purpose.

In general this meant deciding between diplomatic transcription (i.e. sticking to what it says on the page) and
gently modernized features (i.e. reinterpreting medieval signs into modern equivalents) with a view to specific categories. Read on for a summary of the rules and the respective rationale behind them.



SUMMARY

PUNCTUATION
- Modern: medieval punctuation is transcribed with modern equivalents; punctus elevatus transcribed as semicolon

CAPITALIZATION
- Diplomatic: Original capitalization retained

ABBREVIATIONS
- Diplomatic where possible: Retain abbreviations and render glyphs as opposed to expanded versions where possible
- "*" where original character isn't served: OCRopus (at the point in time of transcription) could not handle some of the medieval glyphs, even where a Unicode version was present. 
Abbreviations not in OCRopus are uniformly transcribed as "*", in the case of a combined character (such as a consonant with a macron) as the base character followre by "*" (e.g. "t*").
The list of accepted characters in OCRopus can be found in this repository, and downloaded and used as codec in the OCRopus training process. 

SPACING
- Diplomatic: Preserve manuscript spacing, i.e. give diplomatic transcription

NUMBERS
- Diplomatic: retain original version of both Roman and Arabic numerals

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Discussion 
  
PUNCTUATION:
Training Ocropus from scratch should mean that we can uniquely attune the model to the medieval punctuation marks, i.e. we would avoid errors based on similarity of a medieval punctuation mark with a modern one – i.e. the middle dot with a full stop or the medieval comma with a double colon as the model has no previous/independent information about the wonders of modern punctuation; however, different manuscripts might write out the same punctuation differently and whilst within one document the mapping between image and unicode character would be consistent, across a range of manuscripts it might not.
To simplify, it would make sense to supplant medieval punctuation by the corresponding modern counterparts and in a situation where the medieval counterparts can be mapped to the modern ones uniquely, this shouldn't pose a problem.
The potential danger is that some of the medieval punctuation marks resemble each other too closely and get confused but that is the risk of OCR in general.
 
The existing transcription at times includes punctuation marks that are not indicated in the initial manuscript, i.e. missing commata. Those would be hard to train for as the model cannot really infer a missing input from the context – it can only interpret signs present. Worst case scenario we would train the OCR to insert commata in blank spaces or or add them to other letters that featered in the vicinity of an extra comma in the transcription.
 
Recommendation:
- transcribe medieval punctuation marks with modern equivalents
- medieval signs without a modern equivalent can be transcribed with their closest stand-in, e.g. the  punctus elevatus as semicolon, rather than the Unicode punctus elevatus
- make sure the medieval and modern corresponding signs map uniquely, i.e. no two modern signs associated with one medieval sign (vice versa shouldn't be a problem)
- only transcribe punctuation marks present in original manuscripts, i.e. no corrective additions
 
 
CAPITALIZATION:
Apart from the normal instances of capital letters, there are sometimes passages in medieval manuscripts written in capital letters that would be represented in normal lower case in modern editions; however, as we cannot train Ocropus to apply capitalization from context other than the letter itself, we would introduce inconsistencies into the training process transcribing some but not other lower-case letters as capitals

Recommendation:
- transcribe diplomatically


ABBREVIATIONS:
Ocropus supports some glyphs that are specific to manuscripts and the early printing tradition, amongst these: ꝑꝓꝗꝙꝛꝝꝫꝯꝶ. Others such as e.g. consonants with macrons are not supported, so a perfectly diplomatic transcription would never be possible. 
The question therefore is whether or which abbreviations should be expanded (i.e. modernized) or transcribed diplomatically.
 
Points to note:
1) Preserving original abbreviations would offer a “closer” transcription (i.e. more akin to a diplomatic transcription) that editors or users could later handle based on their own needs or preferences. For example, it would be pretty easy for anyone using the OCR output with a text editor to search/replace certain abbreviations (dns, dnm, ꝑ, etc.), especially based on any idiosyncratic uses in the particular manuscript rather than generalized trends.
2) Expanding abbreviations would offer more modernization, but other protocols seem to avoid this; trying to train OCRopus on combinations of Latin letters standing in for single glyphs could lead to inconsistencies though, even if the glyphs map reliably to a single seet of letters (e.g. ꝙ))
3) Some glyphs (such as ꝑ) are not expanded in a consistent form but depending on context. Mapping the same character to alternative, context-dependent combinations of modern letters might be handled well with a very big mass of data, but in our smaller ballpark is likely to lead to counterproductive inconsistencies.
4) Some glyphs do not have unicode equivalents and thus cannot be transcribed diplomatically at all.
5) Some glyphs do have unicode equivalents and could be transcribed diplomatically, but are not handled by OCRopus.
6) Caroline minuscule, compared to other forms of medieval handwriting, tends to have comparatively fewer abbreviations

Recommendation:
Seeing that diplomatic seems to be the desirable and more reliable way of handling abbreviations but isn't always possible, we decided to transcribe diplomatically where possible, not use modern expansions at all to avoid inconsistent mapping and transcribe non-transcribable characters in a simple, uniform fashion ("*"), i.e. mark the presence of an abbreviation rather than write out the actual, specific abbreviation. Seeing that Caroline minuscule is still comparatively simple in that regard, compared to other manuscript hands, handling abbreviations in this way would not be all too lacking. 
 
 
SPACING
The manuscripts themselves have numerous occurrences where two words are practically indistinguishably pasted together. As it is,  OCRopus can be trained for letters, presumably less so for spaces. Our guess is that worst-case scenario, a transcription with modern spacing would not be picked up on especially in the training (i.e. words that are pasted together would not be prised apart in the recognition process by a model trained on words pasted together in the original and prised apart in the transcription).
Secondly, comparing modern editions with medieval originals, there are also issues with lineation and word separation: i.e. when a scribe divides a word when the whole won’t fit onto the end of a line. As with abbreviations, there are two ways to handle this: 1) preserve what the manuscript says (the diplomatic route), which a later editor can always handle based on the OCR output; or 2) try to modernize, but then we’re crossing boundaries of lines in the manuscript and that might get confusing with how we understand OCRopus works based on segmenting the text.
 
Recommendation:
- apply dipomatic spacing and preserve separation of words across lines
 
 
NUMBERS
There are not many numbers but it seems best to stay close to the original, preserving numbers either as Roman numerals or spelled out in words. Again, the idea was that later editors can always standardize or modernize based on their own aims. Hence, numbers are either transcribed as "1, 2, 3, etc." or "I, V, X, etc.".

Commit message:

Explain repo structure in README.md

README.md, after:

# OCR Ground truth for Caroline Miniscule

This ground truth repository is a work in process; it currently accounts for a part of our complete Caroline Minuscule training pool of around 70 manuscripts used for our OCRopus Caroline Minuscule model (see ocropus-models repository).

## Repository structure

Each manuscript used is contained in a directory, which contains subdirectories for each page and a `metadata.txt` file.

The page subdirectories are split into lines (by ocropus-gpageseg), with `.png` images and corresponding `.gt.txt` ground truth text files. These have been prepared for the OCRopus OCR engine, but should be usable by other OCR engines which work on a line by line basis. Please let us know if you adapt the ground truth to work with other OCR engines, we'd love to hear about it.

### License, provenance, metadata

The ground truth contained in this repository should be considered Public Domain, or licensed under Apache License 2.0, whichever suits your needs better.

Each manuscript directory contains a `metadata.txt` which describes its provenence and the licensing of the images. We have only used manuscript images which are freely redistributable and reusable.



## OCR Ground Truth Transcription Protocol

The ground truth published in this repository has been created according to a number of guidelines designed to find a compromise
between the quirks of medieval writing and the limitations of modern software (i.e. its incompatibility with certain medieval characters or the fact that some 
medieval characters are not represented in unicode).
With some respect, we simply made some executive decisions on the transcription guidelines where we felt this would best serve the overall purpose.

In general this meant deciding between diplomatic transcription (i.e. sticking to what it says on the page) and
gently modernized features (i.e. reinterpreting medieval signs into modern equivalents) with a view to specific categories. Read on for a summary of the rules and the respective rationale behind them.



SUMMARY

PUNCTUATION
- Modern: medieval punctuation is transcribed with modern equivalents; punctus elevatus transcribed as semicolon

CAPITALIZATION
- Diplomatic: Original capitalization retained

ABBREVIATIONS
- Diplomatic where possible: Retain abbreviations and render glyphs as opposed to expanded versions where possible
- "*" where original character isn't served: OCRopus (at the point in time of transcription) could not handle some of the medieval glyphs, even where a Unicode version was present. 
Abbreviations not in OCRopus are uniformly transcribed as "*", in the case of a combined character (such as a consonant with a macron) as the base character followre by "*" (e.g. "t*").
The list of accepted characters in OCRopus can be found in this repository, and downloaded and used as codec in the OCRopus training process. 

SPACING
- Diplomatic: Preserve manuscript spacing, i.e. give diplomatic transcription

NUMBERS
- Diplomatic: retain original version of both Roman and Arabic numerals

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Discussion 
  
PUNCTUATION:
Training Ocropus from scratch should mean that we can uniquely attune the model to the medieval punctuation marks, i.e. we would avoid errors based on similarity of a medieval punctuation mark with a modern one – i.e. the middle dot with a full stop or the medieval comma with a double colon as the model has no previous/independent information about the wonders of modern punctuation; however, different manuscripts might write out the same punctuation differently and whilst within one document the mapping between image and unicode character would be consistent, across a range of manuscripts it might not.
To simplify, it would make sense to supplant medieval punctuation by the corresponding modern counterparts and in a situation where the medieval counterparts can be mapped to the modern ones uniquely, this shouldn't pose a problem.
The potential danger is that some of the medieval punctuation marks resemble each other too closely and get confused but that is the risk of OCR in general.
 
The existing transcription at times includes punctuation marks that are not indicated in the initial manuscript, i.e. missing commata. Those would be hard to train for as the model cannot really infer a missing input from the context – it can only interpret signs present. Worst case scenario we would train the OCR to insert commata in blank spaces or or add them to other letters that featered in the vicinity of an extra comma in the transcription.
 
Recommendation:
- transcribe medieval punctuation marks with modern equivalents
- medieval signs without a modern equivalent can be transcribed with their closest stand-in, e.g. the  punctus elevatus as semicolon, rather than the Unicode punctus elevatus
- make sure the medieval and modern corresponding signs map uniquely, i.e. no two modern signs associated with one medieval sign (vice versa shouldn't be a problem)
- only transcribe punctuation marks present in original manuscripts, i.e. no corrective additions
 
 
CAPITALIZATION:
Apart from the normal instances of capital letters, there are sometimes passages in medieval manuscripts written in capital letters that would be represented in normal lower case in modern editions; however, as we cannot train Ocropus to apply capitalization from context other than the letter itself, we would introduce inconsistencies into the training process transcribing some but not other lower-case letters as capitals

Recommendation:
- transcribe diplomatically


ABBREVIATIONS:
Ocropus supports some glyphs that are specific to manuscripts and the early printing tradition, amongst these: ꝑꝓꝗꝙꝛꝝꝫꝯꝶ. Others such as e.g. consonants with macrons are not supported, so a perfectly diplomatic transcription would never be possible. 
The question therefore is whether or which abbreviations should be expanded (i.e. modernized) or transcribed diplomatically.
 
Points to note:
1) Preserving original abbreviations would offer a “closer” transcription (i.e. more akin to a diplomatic transcription) that editors or users could later handle based on their own needs or preferences. For example, it would be pretty easy for anyone using the OCR output with a text editor to search/replace certain abbreviations (dns, dnm, ꝑ, etc.), especially based on any idiosyncratic uses in the particular manuscript rather than generalized trends.
2) Expanding abbreviations would offer more modernization, but other protocols seem to avoid this; trying to train OCRopus on combinations of Latin letters standing in for single glyphs could lead to inconsistencies though, even if the glyphs map reliably to a single seet of letters (e.g. ꝙ))
3) Some glyphs (such as ꝑ) are not expanded in a consistent form but depending on context. Mapping the same character to alternative, context-dependent combinations of modern letters might be handled well with a very big mass of data, but in our smaller ballpark is likely to lead to counterproductive inconsistencies.
4) Some glyphs do not have unicode equivalents and thus cannot be transcribed diplomatically at all.
5) Some glyphs do have unicode equivalents and could be transcribed diplomatically, but are not handled by OCRopus.
6) Caroline minuscule, compared to other forms of medieval handwriting, tends to have comparatively fewer abbreviations

Recommendation:
Seeing that diplomatic seems to be the desirable and more reliable way of handling abbreviations but isn't always possible, we decided to transcribe diplomatically where possible, not use modern expansions at all to avoid inconsistent mapping and transcribe non-transcribable characters in a simple, uniform fashion ("*"), i.e. mark the presence of an abbreviation rather than write out the actual, specific abbreviation. Seeing that Caroline minuscule is still comparatively simple in that regard, compared to other manuscript hands, handling abbreviations in this way would not be all too lacking. 
 
 
SPACING
The manuscripts themselves have numerous occurrences where two words are practically indistinguishably pasted together. As it is,  OCRopus can be trained for letters, presumably less so for spaces. Our guess is that worst-case scenario, a transcription with modern spacing would not be picked up on especially in the training (i.e. words that are pasted together would not be prised apart in the recognition process by a model trained on words pasted together in the original and prised apart in the transcription).
Secondly, comparing modern editions with medieval originals, there are also issues with lineation and word separation: i.e. when a scribe divides a word when the whole won’t fit onto the end of a line. As with abbreviations, there are two ways to handle this: 1) preserve what the manuscript says (the diplomatic route), which a later editor can always handle based on the OCR output; or 2) try to modernize, but then we’re crossing boundaries of lines in the manuscript and that might get confusing with how we understand OCRopus works based on segmenting the text.
 
Recommendation:
- apply dipomatic spacing and preserve separation of words across lines
 
 
NUMBERS
There are not many numbers but it seems best to stay close to the original, preserving numbers either as Roman numerals or spelled out in words. Again, the idea was that later editors can always standardize or modernize based on their own aims. Hence, numbers are either transcribed as "1, 2, 3, etc." or "I, V, X, etc.".
